Lecture 1: The Nature and Scope of Psychology
Questions to think about:
	1. What is a psychological explanation of behavior?
	2. Why did psychology take so long to emerge as a science?
	3. Why did personality and social psychology lag behind the study of perception, learning, and memory?
	4. If you're a foreign student. How did psychology develop in your native country?

William James (1842-1910)
	. "Psychology is the science of mental life"
	. from his point of view the goal of was to describe and explain the mental sctructure and processes that underlie human experience thought and action
	. the task of psych is to explain how our mind works
	. the science of mental life which tries to understand how the mind works

A Short List of Mental Functions

Immanuel Kant(1724-1804)
	. 18th cen German philosopher
	. "There are three absolute, irreducible faculties of mind: knowledge, feeling, and desire."
	.  it is is by virtue of our minds that we acquire knowledge and experience emotions, moods, needs, and wants

The Trilogy of Mind:

Eernest Hilgard(1980)
	. recasts Kant's idea
	. the Trilogy of Mind:
	. Cognition: knowledge and beliefs
	. Emotion: affects, moods, and feelings
	. Motivation: drives, needs, desires, goals, and purposes

The Scope of Psychology:
	.basic processes: how the mind works
		.ie how we perceive objects, remember events, why we feel happy or sad, what happens when we are hungry etc...
	.development: origins of mind
		.the origins of the mind especially the development over year
		.how does a child acquire mental faculty learned? innate?
		.evolution of the mind
		.relation between minds of human beings and those of other creatures
		.question whether other creatures of minds to begin with?
	.individual differences: individual organization of mental life
		.ie intelligence, nature, nurture
		.different traits, where those characeristics comes from and how they affect us
	.pathology: disorders of mind and behavior
		.disorder of mental functions, cognition, emotion, and motivation in many form of mental illness
		.depression...
	.applications of basic knowledge: education, psychotherapy, and workplace
		.how we can us the knowledge to help teacher to teach students more effectively
		.use knowledge to help prevent mental and physical illnesses
		.help workers to become more adept and efficient and productivity between workers, work, and supervisors

The Doctrine of Mentalism/Mental Causation
	. Mental States are to Action as Cause to Effect
	.psych assume that what we do, how we behave is determined by what we were thinking, feeling, and desired at the time that that behavior takes place
	.always concern the behavior of a single indiv, explan. is always considred in that indiv's state of mind

Example Behavior: a person commits suicide
.Cognitive Explanation: 	
	.knowledge, beliefs
	.he believed he was worthless
.Emotional Explanation:
	.affects, moods, and feelings
	.he felt depressed
.Motivational Explanation:
	.drives, needs, goals
	.he no longer wanted to live 
.Psychological explanation of behavior always explain an individual's action by invoking his/her mental states
.psychology tries to understand how those 3 are related and affects a person's mind

Levels of Explanation
	.Sociocultural <-> Psychological <-> Biophysical
	.no one level is superior than the others

Psychology as a Social Science
	the individual in society

	.Social Interaction
		.cooperation, competition
		.need to understand social context between humans to understand how our minds are affected and how they work
	.Social Influence
		.individuals, groups
		.how it is that people relate to each other in everyday
		.how an individual can affect a group that he/she is a part of 
	.Social Cognition
		.how it is that people relate o each other in the course of everyday living
		.how we make judgment about other people
		.how do we feel about the things that happen around ourselves
	.Personality
		.indiv differences
		.organization of individual lives

Psychology vs Social Psychology = Mind in the Abstract vs Mind in Action  

Psychology as a Biological Science
	The brain is the physical basis of the mind
.the intent to question how our mind works naturally lead to the interest in how the physical structure, the brain, that causes it
	.Neuroscience
		.neuroanatomy, neurophysiology
		.brain is composed of cells called neurons that transfer information and tell other cells to do things
		.we want to learn about how that helps the cells communicate with each other 
	.Other Bodily Systems
		.Endocrine System
		.Immune System
		.how the nervous system can influence the immune system
	.Molecular and Cellular Biology
	.Genetics
	.Evolutionary Biology
	.Ecology
		.concern with a specie's adaptation to its environment

Psychology as a Physical Science
	The Brain is an electrochemical system
	.Psychophysics
		.physical stimuli vs psychological state
	.brain imaging
		.positron emission tomography
		.magnetic resonance imaging(MRI): allowed them to see the brain at works when subject engages in daily activities
		.magnetoencephalography

The Question of Reductionism
. can principles of psychology be reduced to the principles of physics?
. explain behavior solely in terms of electrical chimcal activities
. still topic of debate

Emest Rutherford(1871-1937)
	."There is only one science, and it is physics; all the rest is stamp collecting"

Levels of Explanation:
	.we neither favors nor reject reductionism

	.Psychological Explanations: interms of cognition, emotion, motivation
		.individual mental states
	.Sociocultural Explanation: interms of socio-cultural structures, practices
		.group membership, institutional roles
	.Biophysical explanations: in terms of neurotransmitters, genes, hormones
		.biological, physical structures, procedures

History of Psychology:
"Psychology Has a Long Past, but Only a Short History" Herman von Ebbinghaus
.16th-.17th "Study of Soul" or "Spirits"
	.Greek Psycho, "Soul or "Mind"
	.Latin Logia, "Study"
.Christian Wolff
	.Psychologia Empirica(1732)
	.Psychologia Rationalis(1734)
.David Hartley: Observations on Man(1749)
	."Psychology, or the Theory of the Human Mind"
.analysis on how the mind works were based on philosophical methods such as introspection, reasoning, and logical inference

Psychology as an Impossible Science
.at this time, psych is a legitamte field but is part of humanity, not science! Thought it never can be a science!

Rene Descartes(1596-1650)
	.Substance Dualism
		.Material Body
		.Immaterial Mind
		.body and mind are two composed of separate things
	.view prevail for the next 100 years

Immanuel Kant:
	.argue that psych could never become a fullfledged science
	.Science Based on Measurement
		.immaterial substances cannot be measured...
.thus during the Enlightenment, psychology was ruled out 

The Emergence of Scientific Psychology
	.Psychophysics
		.Weber(1830) andFechner(1860)
		.asked their subjects to assign numbers to the intensity of their sensory experiences
		.then link those numbers to various physical measurements
	.Physiological Psychology
		.Muller(1833-1840)
			.link what goes on in the mind with what goes on in thebody
			.Doctrine of Specific Nerve Energies
		.Helmholtz(1856-1867)
			.Physiological Optics
			.linking perceptual experiences to both physics and physiology
			.Reaction Time
				.Speed of Neural Impulse(Helmholtz, 1850)
				.Speed of Mental Processes(Donders, 1868)
	.by quantifying reports of sensory experiences and by measuring the speed of mental processes, showed that mind could be measured after all

First Laboratories:
	.Leipzig (Wundt, 1875-1879)
	.in the US
		.Johns Hopkins(Hall, 1883)
		.Pennsylvania(Cattell, 1888)
		.Wisconsin(Jastrow, 1888)
		.Harvard(James, 1875;Munsterberg, 1891)

First Textbooks:
	.Wundt: The Foundations of Physiological Psychology(1873-4)
	.James: 
		.Principles of Psychology(1890)
		.Psychology:Briefer Course(1892)

First American PhDs
	.G Stanley Hall, Harvard (in Phiolosophy)
		-James 1878
	.Joseph Jastrow, Hopkins (in Psychology)
		-Peirce, 1884
	.James McKeen Cattell, Leipzig(in Psychology)
		-Wundt, 1886

First Journals
	.Philosophische Studien
		-Wundt, 1881
	.American Journal of Psychology
		-Hall, 1887
	.Psychological Review
		-Baldwin & Cattell, 1894

Two Kinds of Science, Two Kinds of Psychology (Wundt 1900)
	.Naturwissenschaft vs Geisteswissenschaft
		.(science of nature vs science of spirit(higher mental processes))
	.experimental psychology had to be limited to basic mental functions such as sensation and perception, the rest of psyc can only be analyze in a more observational/historical way
	.Volkerpsychologie (Folk Psych)

From "Immediate Experience" to "Higher Mental Processes"
	.Memory
		-Ebbinghaus(1885)
		.figured out how to measure strength of a memory
	.Learning
		-Pavlov(1898) and Thorndike(1898)
		.pioneered the study of learning in animals
		.classical and instrumental conditioning paradigm
	.Thinking
		-Hull(1920)
		.demonstrate that higher mental processes beyond memory can be studied quantitatively

And Beyond
	.Emotion and Motivation
		-Cannon(1915)
		.relating human conditions fear and hunger to bodily processes
	.Psychopathology
		-Kraepelin(1890s)
		-Jung(1919)
		-Shakow(1930s)

Individual Differences
	.Personal Equation (Bessel, 1820)
	.Mental Measurement(Galton, 1883)
		.Regression, Correlation(1886)
	.Intelligence(Binet & Simon, 1905)
		.Terman(1916), Wechsler(1939)

Personality and Attitudes
	.Personality Measuremet
		-Woodworth Personal Data Sheet(1917)
		-Bernreuter Personality Inventory(1931)
	.Attitude Measurement
		-Thurstone & Chave(1929)
		-Likert(1932)

Completing the Circle
	.Experimental Social Psychology
		-Triplett(1898)
		-Sherif(1935)
	.Experimental Personality Research
		-Shakow(1930s)
		-Murray et al. (1938)
?